Tizen 6.5 Public M1 Release Note (#1439)
Samsung/tizen-docs: docs/platform/release-notes/tizen-6-5-m1.md

# Tizen 6.5 Public M1

Release date: May 31, 2021

> 

Author: It will be added by mijin85cho later.
Please refer to the following link.
https://github.com/Samsung/tizen-docs/pull/1201#discussion_r470166601

## Release Notes

### System (Kernel and System framework)

#### New and changed features

- Kernel upgrade
  - Kernel for Raspberry Pi 4 has been upgraded to version 5.10.25.
- System management

>   - Filesystem compression (squashfs) has been applied to the ramdisk partition.

Reviewer: OK

  - F2FS filesystem has been adopted for writable partitions.

>   - D-Bus message mashalling operations have been optimized.

Reviewer: Right, it's a typo. Thank you.

>   - D-Bus message marshalling operations have been optimized.

Reviewer 2: For consistency: 
```suggestion
  - D-Bus message marshaling operations have been optimized.

- Device and sensor management
  - Hardware abstraction layer (HAL) for device and sensor modules has been refactored.
  - HAL test cases have been developed.
  - Display state caching has been developed.
  - Daemon-less direct API for battery framework has been developed.
- Resource management
  - C# API set for process memory usage on GPU and SWAP has been added.
  - Memory limitation for UI applications has been improved.
- Diagnostics and logging
  - Transparent redirection of stdout and stderr to dlog has been developed.
  - Efficient sharing of diagnostics data between services and applications has been developed.
  - API set for publishing and requesting diagnostics data has been added.

> - Open source

Author: OK

>   - Squashfs has been upgraded to version 4.4 for up-to-date compression algorithms.

Reviewer: OK

  - E2fsprogs has been upgraded to version 1.46.0 for CVE patches.
  - Cryptsetup has been upgraded to version 2.3.3 for CVE patches.

### System (Base)

#### New and changed features

> - Open source

Author: OK

  - libarchive
    - Version 3.4.0 has been upgraded to version 3.5.1.
  - libsigc++
    - Version 2.2.11 has been upgraded to version 2.9.3.
  - libxml++
    - Version 2.34.2 has been upgraded to version 2.42.0.
  - libzip
    - Version 1.5.2 has been upgraded to version 1.7.3.
  - ncureses
    - Version 6.1 has been upgraded to version 6.2.
  - pcre
    - Version 8.43 has been upgraded to version 8.44.
  - procps-ng
    - Version 3.3.15 has been upgraded to version 3.3.16.
  - psmisc
    - Version 23.2 has been upgraded to version 23.3.
  - python
    - Version 2.7.17 has been upgraded to version 2.7.18.
  - python-six
    - Version 1.10.0 has been upgraded to version 1.15.0.
  - sqlite
    - Version 3.31.1 has been upgraded to version 3.33.0.
  - tzdata
    - Version 2019c has been upgraded to version 2020a.
  - update-alternatives
    - Version 1.18.15 has been upgraded to version 1.20.5.
  - util-linux
    - Version 2.34 has been upgraded to version 2.36.
  - xz
    - Version 5.2.4 has been upgraded to version 5.2.5.

#### Fixes

- CVE patches
  - file
    - CVE-2019-18218
  - json-c
    - CVE-2020-12762
  - libsigc++
    - CVE-2019-19221

>     - CVE-2020-9308

Reviewer 3: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/security/what-is-cve
======================================
CVE, short for Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures, is a list of publicly disclosed computer security flaws. When someone refers to a CVE, they mean a security flaw that's been assigned a CVE ID number.
======================================

File package cve reported list
======================================
https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerability-list/vendor_id-15034/product_id-30576/File-Project-File.html
======================================

CVE-2019-18218 
======================================
https://www.cvedetails.com/cve/CVE-2019-18218/

cdf_read_property_info in cdf.c in file through 5.37 does not restrict the number of CDF_VECTOR elements, which allows a heap-based buffer overflow (4-byte out-of-bounds write).
======================================

>     - CVE-2020-9308

Reviewer 2: thanks

### Application framework

#### New and changed features

- Improvement to get package information logic
  - The architecture has been changed from shared-repo to client-server.
  - Database access concurrency has been improved.
- Widget Component
  - Widget Component has been added to component-based application model.

#### Fixes

- preference
  - Preference API has been refactored.
- rpc-port
  - Memory leak has been fixed.
  - The library has been modified to use proxy API in daemon process.
- pkgmgr-tool
  - The tool has been modified to check backend execution in MIC process.

### Window and Interaction

#### New and changed features

> - Open source upgrade

Author: OK

  - Wayland
    - Version 1.18.0 has been upgraded to version 1.18.92.
  - Libevdev
    - Version 1.8.0 has been upgraded to version 1.10.0.
  - Libinput
    - Version 1.15.0 has been upgraded to version 1.16.

>     - Input-haltests has been added for testing input driver(s).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Input-haltests has been added for testing input drivers.

  - Libxkbcommon
    - Libxkbcommon has been upgraded to version 1.0.0.
  - Mtdev
    - Version 1.1.5 has been upgraded to version 1.1.6.
  - NLTK
    - Version 3.2.5 has been upgraded to version 3.4.
  - Mesa
    - Version 19.3 has been upgraded to version 21.0.
- Enlightenment Wayland display server

>   - UI and Video Rotation Synchronization has been added. UI surface and Video surface can be updated on a screen at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- UI and Video Rotation Synchronization have been added. UI surface and Video surface can be updated on a screen at the same time.

  - Hardware Composition based on Atomic Pageflip has been added. This provides the exact time when the pageflip operation has been executed. This feature is available on RPI4 target because it depends on hardware functionality.

>   - Display Server with GPU Explicit synchronization has been added. Display Server can control the file descriptors (fd) for the GPU rendering synchronization in order to manage the efficient rendering process. This feature is available on RPI4 target because it depends on hardware functionality.

Reviewer 4: It looks fine. :)

- TBM

>   - HAL-API-TBM has been added. The libtbm uses HAL-API-TBM instead of loading tbm backend module.

Reviewer 4: It looks fine. :)

- TDM

>   - HAL-API-TDM has been added. The libtdm uses HAL-API-TDM instead of loading tdm backend module.

Reviewer 4: It looks fine. :)

- TTS Framework
  - New client architecture has been applied.
  - New tolerance architecture has been applied.
  - Partial thread safety in client side has been applied.
  - Support for both TIDL and D-Bus has been added.
- Voice Control Framework
  - New audio streaming architecture has been applied. Shortcut for audio streaming has been added.
- Text Input Framework

>   - The API to set the preedit cursor position in preedit has been added.

Reviewer 5: Agree

  - The API to get input hint such as multiline or singleline has been added.
- Sticker Framework
  - The API to set or get the group image has been added.
  - The API to get the list of group image in a sticker package has been added.

#### Fixes

- TTS Framework
  - Playing TTS bugs have been fixed.
  - Potential deadlock bug has been fixed.

>   - TC failure that sometimes happens has been fixed.

Reviewer 6: ok

- Voice Control Framework
  - Memory leak has been fixed.

### Graphics and UI

#### New and changed features

- NUI
  - Components
    - CameraView has been added.
    - CanvasView for custom drawing has been added.

>     - Navigator, Page and AppBar have been added.

Reviewer 7: ok

>     - TabView and its related classes, TabBar, TabContent, TabButton and TabButtonGroup have been added.

Reviewer 7: ok

    - Dialog and AlertDialog have been added.
    - Picker has been added.
    - CollectionView has been added.
    - ScrollOutOfBound event has been added in ScrollableBase.
  - Common
    - ThemeManager has been added.
    - FrameUpdateCallback has been added.
    - Palette API set has been added.
    - CornerRadiusPolicy has been added in View.
    - TouchArea property has been added in View.
    - ExcludeLayouting has been added in View.
    - Sound Feedback has been added in Control.

>     - FontSizeScale property has been added in TextLabel, TextField and TextEditor.

Reviewer 7: ok

    - Parse color from Strings (hexCode, RGB, RGBA) has been added.

>     - DisallowInterceptTouchEvent, which disables the parent view’s touch intercepting, has been added.

Reviewer 7: ok

- DALi

>   - Renderer & Animation

Reviewer 7: ok

    - Support for advanced blending equations has been added.
    - Some View's properties that couldn't be animated can be animated now.

>     - Support for riv format has been added, Rive animation runtime engine has been integrated.

Reviewer 7: ok

>   - Image & Video

Reviewer 7: ok

    - SVG Raster Engine (NanoSVG) has been replaced with TizenVG (ThorVG).
    - Support for SVG masking and path clipping has been added.

>     - Support for synchronization of video players' z-order has been added.

Author: OK

  - Components
    - Some WebView API set has been added.

>     - Some properties have been added to TextLabel, TextField and TextEditor.

Reviewer 7: ok

  - Common
    - Support for MacOS has been added.
    - Memory management has been optimized.
- ThorVG
  -  A New vector graphics engine has been introduced.
- EFL
  - Renderer and Animation
    - Vector Primitive Engine (Ector) has been replaced with TizenVG (ThorVG).
    - Support for WebP Animation has been added.
  - Image and Video
    - Video and UI Sync has been added.
    - Support for APNG Image format has been added.

> - Open source

Reviewer 7: ok

      - MV_BARCODE_DETECT_ATTR_ROTATION_DIRECTION
    - Enumeration for the direction
      - MV_BARCODE_DETECT_ATTR_ROTATION_CLOCKWISE
      - MV_BARCODE_DETECT_ATTR_ROTATION_COUNTER_CLOCKWISE
      - MV_BARCODE_DETECT_ATTR_ROTATION_ALL
    - One attribute for image enhancement has been added.
      - MV_BARCODE_DETECT_ATTR_USE_ENHANCEMENT
- Media Content
  - New API for getting media handle by path has been added.
- Image Util
  - Support for decoding HEIF (High Efficiency Image Format) has been added.
    - Decode HEIC brand of HEIF

#### Fixes

- Muse server
  - Deadlock problem of signal handler has been fixed by calling malloc of async-signal-safe internally.
- Resource Manager
  - A conflict issue caused by not released resource of the abnormal terminated client has been fixed.
- Media Streamer
  - Custom sink node freeze bug has been fixed.
  - An unexpected error problem with stop() API has been fixed.

### Network and Connectivity

#### New and changed features

- User Awareness API
  - The API set for device has been added.
  - The API set for user has been added.
  - The API set for service has been added.
  - The API set for monitor has been added.

>   - Following API set is required the Bluetooth or network privilege as the device type.

Reviewer 2: Not clear

Reviewer 8: Following API set requires the Bluetooth or network privilege as the device type which is monitored by the API

Reviewer 2: @semun-lee This is better.

Reviewer 8: Thanks

>     - Privilege : http://tizen.org/privilege/bluetooth or http://tizen.org/privilege/network.get

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Privilege: `http://tizen.org/privilege/bluetooth` or `http://tizen.org/privilege/network.get`

Reviewer 8: will accept

    - Affected API set
      - ua_monitor_add_sensor
      - ua_monitor_remove_sensor
      - ua_user_add_device
      - ua_user_remove_device
      - ua_device_update
      - ua_monitor_start_scan
      - ua_monitor_stop_scan
      - ua_monitor_start_presence_detection
      - ua_monitor_stop_presence_detection
      - ua_monitor_start_absence_detection
      - ua_monitor_stop_absence_detection

>   - Following API is required the location privilege.

Reviewer 2: Not clear 

What does following refer to ?

Reviewer 8: Following API set requires the location privilege.

"Affected API set" are the following API set.

Reviewer 2: @semun-lee This is better. 

Following API set requires the location privilege:

Reviewer 8: will accept

>     - Privilege : http://tizen.org/privilege/location

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Privilege: `http://tizen.org/privilege/location`

Reviewer 8: will accept

    - Affected API set
      - ua_monitor_start_scan
      - ua_monitor_stop_scan
      - ua_monitor_start_presence_detection
      - ua_monitor_stop_presence_detection
      - ua_monitor_start_absence_detection
      - ua_monitor_stop_absence_detection
- Wi-Fi Manager API
  - Wi-Fi connection logic has been optimized for better performance.
- Wi-Fi
  - MAC address randomization has been added.
- Bluetooth Transport Discovery Service (TDS)
  - An application scenario of enabling Wi-Fi Aware using Bluetooth Transport Discovery Service specification has been introduced.

>   - Devices, which want to communicate via Wi-Fi Aware technology, do not need to keep their Wi-Fi Aware interfaces to be activated always. Bluetooth TDS provides a feature of discovery available communication technologies between devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Devices which can communicate Wusing i-Fi Aware technology, do not need to keep their Wi-Fi Aware interfaces to be activated always. Bluetooth TDS provides a feature of the discovery of available communication technologies between devices.
```
Please check for technical correctness

Reviewer 8: will accept. I just modified errata."Wusing -> using Wi-Fi"
Devices which can communicate using Wi-Fi Aware technology, do not need to keep their Wi-Fi Aware interfaces to be activated always. Bluetooth TDS provides a feature of the discovery of available communication technologies between devices.

Reviewer 2: Yes sorry for that.

Reviewer 8: Thanks

- Vine
  - Secure simple service discovery and communication framework, a.k.a. Vine has been added.
  - Applications in the same LAN can discover others in a simple way.
  - Applications are able to communicate in secure channel, which is encrypted via TLS.
- Open Source
  - connman has been upgraded to version 1.38.
  - wpa_supplicant has been upgraded to version 2.9.
  - curl has been upgraded to version 7.73.0.
  - c-ares has been upgraded to version 1.17.1.

#### Fixes

- Bluetooth
  - GATT handler bugs have been fixed.

>   - The bug of Sending response twice has been fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The bug of sending response twice has been fixed.

Reviewer 8: will accept

- Network
  - Bugs in wifi-manager API have been fixed.
  - Bugs in ConnMan have been fixed.

### Security

#### New and changed features

- Privileges
  - New privileges have been added.
    - http://tizen.org/privilege/bugreport.admin
    - http://tizen.org/privilege/usb.host

>     - http://tizen.org/privilege/log

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Privileges
  - New privileges have been added.
    - `http://tizen.org/privilege/bugreport.admin`
    - `http://tizen.org/privilege/usb.host`
    - `http://tizen.org/privilege/log`

Reviewer 9: will accept

### Service framework

#### Fixes

- Context Framework
  - Potential issues and memory leaks have been fixed.
- Account Framework
  - Potential issues have been fixed.
- Location Framework
  - Memory leaks have been fixed.
- Sync Manager
  - Potential defects have been fixed.

### Web framework

#### New and changed features

- Web Engine

>   - Open source chromium 85 version base has been applied. Below features and API set have been provided by the new web engine.

Reviewer 10: will accept

    - Web Animations
      - Support for animation.ready and animation.finished has been added.
      - Smoother animation support with composite mode
    - SameSite Cookies
      - For cookies without specifying a SameSite attribute will be treated as SameSite=Lax by default.
    - WebRTC
      - Support for latest WebRTC features for group calls has been added.

>   - Layout engine(LayoutNG) bug fixes and performance enhancement

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Layout engine(LayoutNG) bug fixes and performance enhancement.

Reviewer 10: will accept

  - TLS 1.0 and TLS 1.1 have been deprecated.
- Web Runtime

>   - Open source electron 10.1.4 version has been applied.

Reviewer 10: will accept

    - Popup class has been removed.
    - CheckBoxButton class has been removed.
    - Button class has been removed.
    - WidgetViewSignal class has been removed.
    - KeyBoardTypeSignalType class has been removed.
    - SWIGTYPE_p_bundle class has been removed.
    - PropertyNotifySignal class has been removed.
    - Property class of ItemView, Scorallable, Renderer, and Shader has been removed.
    - LayerBehavior.Layer2D enum has been removed.
    - Shadow class has been added.
    - Theme class has been added.
    - TimePeriod class has been added.
    - Transition class has been added.
    - ControlState class has been added.
    - ViewStyle class has been added.
    - AppBar class has been added.
    - ContentPage class has been added.
    - Navigator class has been added.
    - Page class has been added.
  - Tizen.Security
    - TEEC has been deprecated.
- Xamarin.Forms
  - Xamarin.Forms 5.0.0, which is the latest stable version has been supported.

#### Fixes

- Tizen.Network.Bluetooth
  - Marshaler coverting bugs have been fixed.
  - Null reference bugs have been fixed.

### Toolchain

#### New and changed features

- New architecture(Armv7hl) support

>   - Gcc: Armv7hl configuration has been newly added for hard float ABI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - GCC: Armv7hl configuration has been newly added for hard float ABI.

Reviewer 11: > 

Agreed. Thank you!

#### Fixes

- Gcc/ Libsanitizer
  - SIGSEGV in fopen64 interceptor has been fixed.
- Glibc/ iconvdata (CVE-2019-25013)
  - Buffer overrun in EUC-KR conversion module has been fixed.

### Machine Learning

#### New and changed features

- ML / Web Inference API
  - New API set, Pipeline and Single have been added.
- Machine Learning Inference API update

>   - The package name has been changed from capi-nnstreamer to capi-machine-learning-inference. However, this is a platform-internal change, which does not affect application developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The package name has been changed from capi-nnstreamer to capi-machine-learning-inference. However, this is a platform internal change, and does not affect application developers.

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

  - The ability to register a tensor_if custom callback function in case the condition of tensor_if becomes complex has been added.

>   - The ability to open the model with various custom options such as flexible or fixed input dimensions has been added; i.e. ml_single_open_full().

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The ability to open the model with various custom options such as flexible or fixed input dimensions has been added; for example, ml_single_open_full().

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

  - The ability to check whether the given element is registered or not has been added.

>   - The ability to invoke the model with pre-allocated output buffers, which is generally faster than normal invocation, has been added; i.e. ml_single_invoke_fast().

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The ability to invoke the model with pre-allocated output buffers, which is generally faster than normal invocation, has been added; for example, ml_single_invoke_fast().

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

- NNStreamer update
  - NNStreamer has been upgraded from 1.6.0 to 1.7.1.

>   - The ability to create conditional branches (i.e. tensor_if) based on tensor values has been added. For example, developers may skip frames if there is no object detected with high confidence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The ability to create conditional branches ( tensor_if) based on tensor values has been added. For example, developers may skip frames if there is no object detected with high confidence.

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

  - The ability to support TensorFlow Lite 2 with GPU and NNAPI delegations along with gRPC/flatbuffer with sync and async mode has been added.

>   - The ability to designate priorities between multiple frameworks in case multiple frameworks support the same model file format (e.g., tensorflow-lite’s .tflite format) has been added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The ability to designate priorities between multiple frameworks in case multiple frameworks support the same model file format (for example, TensorFlow-lite’s .tflite format) has been added.

Reviewer 12: Agreed.

  - The ORC acceleration for tensor manipulation and subplugin auto detection based on the extension of the model file has been added.

>   - An ml_nnfw_type_e enumeration has been added to support pytorch and nntrainer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - An ml_nnfw_type_e enumeration has been added to support PyTorch and NNtrainer.

Reviewer 13: Agreed.

> - Machine Learning Training API update

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Machine Learning training API update

Reviewer 13: It's more like Noun, Not verb. So.. I guess.. Training is better. 
like Machine Learning Training API, Machine Learning Inference API..

Reviewer 2: sure thanks

  - Number of ml_train_layer_type_e has been added.
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_BN
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_CONV2D
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_FLATTEN
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_ACTIVATION
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_ADDITION
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_CONCAT
    - ML_TRAIN_LAYER_TYPE_MULTIOUT

> - ONE runtime update

Reviewer 2: Why is ONE in caps ? any specific reason?

Reviewer 14: @nawab-samsung , ONE is an acronym for _On-device Neural Engine_. So write it all in capital letters.
PTAL https://github.com/Samsung/ONE

  - ONE runtime has been upgraded from 1.9.0 to 1.15.0.
  - ONERT uses ARM Compute Library v21.02.
  - Expanded CPU backend support
    - 16x1 block sparsity support in Float32 FullyConnected operation.

>     - Add, AvgPool2d, Concat Conv2D, DepthToSpace DepthwiseConv2D, Dequantize, Div, Elu, ExpandDims, LeakRelu, LogicalAnd, Maximum, MaxPool2D, Minimum, Mul, Pad, PadV2, Quantize, Rank, Reshape, Resizebiliear, Shape, Softmax, Squeeze, Sub support for INT8 quantized model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Add, AvgPool2d, Concat Conv2D, DepthToSpace DepthwiseConv2D, Dequantize, Div, Elu, ExpandDims, LeakRelu, LogicalAnd, Maximum, MaxPool2D, Minimum, Mul, Pad, PadV2, Quantize, Rank, Reshape, Resizebiliear, Shape, Softmax, Squeeze, and Sub support for INT8 quantized model
```

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
    - Add, AvgPool2d, Concat, Conv2D, DepthToSpace, DepthwiseConv2D, Dequantize, Div, Elu, ExpandDims, LeakRelu, LogicalAnd, Maximum, MaxPool2D, Minimum, Mul, Pad, PadV2, Quantize, Rank, Reshape, Resizebiliear, Shape, Softmax, Squeeze, and Sub support for INT8 quantized model
```
@nawab-samsung , Thank you for suggestion. In addition, I found a few commas missing, and I propose a new one like this.
